DIALOGUE PRESENTATION INTENT
============================

Purpose
-------

This document records the current aesthetic goals, technical concerns, and
recommended direction for the game's dialogue presentation. It is design intent,
not a claim that the described system has already been implemented.


Aesthetic Direction
-------------------

The target lies between:

* The simple, highly readable dialogue borders of Pokemon Crystal, which suggest
  a physical object with very little visual information.
* The carved, weighty, made-of-stone interfaces found in DOOM and many classic
  MS-DOS role-playing games.

The result should feel physical and materially grounded without becoming so
detailed that it competes with dialogue text. The frame should communicate
stone, age, weight, and craftsmanship through economical pixel-art cues.

A promising visual recipe is:

* A heavy charcoal outer edge or shadow, biased slightly down and right.
* A compact mid-gray stone face.
* A light upper/left bevel and dark lower/right bevel.
* A near-black inner keyline separating the frame from the text well.
* A dark, visually quiet center behind the text.
* Restrained cracks, chips, rivets, runes, skulls, or squared stone joints,
  concentrated in corners rather than repeated conspicuously along every edge.
* A small physical continue indicator, such as a stone chip, rune, or arrow.

Readability should remain closer to Pokemon Crystal than to a dense ornamental
RPG interface. Stone detail is subordinate to text.


Asset Authoring
---------------

Pixelorama is an appropriate authoring tool, but the primary asset should not be
one complete dialogue box at a fixed size. Author a modular nine-slice frame:

    corner | top edge    | corner
    -------+-------------+-------
    left   | center fill | right
    edge   |             | edge
    -------+-------------+-------
    corner | bottom edge | corner

Godot should assemble this as a StyleBoxTexture on a PanelContainer, or through
an equivalent nine-patch treatment. Corners remain fixed while edges and the
center tile or stretch as appropriate.

Good starting experiments are 8x8- or 12x12-pixel corner regions inside a small
24x24-, 36x36-, or 48x48-pixel source texture. Recognizable details should live
in corners or separate ornaments. Repeating edges should remain quiet enough
that tiling is not obvious.

The initial art pass should be grayscale. Border thickness, padding, tiling, and
text readability should be proven before final color and decorative detail.


Shared Dialogue Architecture
----------------------------

Overworld and chess battle dialogue should use one semantic dialogue system,
not separate implementations. Both contexts will need the same underlying
behavior:

* Speaker identity and optional portrait.
* Paginated text.
* Continue prompts.
* Choices and selection state.
* Input locking and advancement.
* Placement that avoids important action.
* Dialogue lifecycle signals for game flow and presentation.

A reusable DialogueView should contain approximately:

    DialogueView
      SafeArea
        DialoguePanel
          PortraitSlot
          SpeakerName
          DialogueText
          ContinueIndicator
          ChoiceList

Dialogue data should provide content, speaker, portrait, choices, and preferred
placement. A presentation skin should provide the frame, typography, colors,
sounds, ornaments, and animation.

The ordinary dialogue layout should use connected, equal-height portrait and
text panels rather than placing the portrait inside a larger enclosing box. The
bordered portrait panel remains visible on the left and the left-justified text
panel meets it at a shared seam. Portrait assets use the 3:4 aspect ratio
established by the 96x128 hood test portrait. A dedicated empty-state asset will
eventually fill the portrait panel for off-screen, unknown, or otherwise
unpictured speakers so absence does not look like a missing asset. A small
nameplate should sit directly on top of the text panel without overlapping it.
The portrait panel extends upward so its top aligns with the nameplate's top,
while its bottom aligns with the text panel's bottom. The plaque displays the
current speaker's known name, or "???" when the speaker has not been identified.

Portrait selection belongs to authored dialogue data rather than to the view.
A character may have multiple expression portraits, and the selected expression
may change at page boundaries or within a page at a particular character reveal
position. Authored events may be very frequent: a line such as "hahahaha" should
be able to alternate between two laughing portraits on every "ha". The current
hood NPC has only one portrait, but the data model should not encode that
limitation.


Authored Text and Reveal
------------------------

Dialogue pages should support authored spans and reveal events without coupling
story content to scene code. Desired span presentation includes font-size
changes, capitalization, color, and animated effects such as jiggling. Authoring
should initially use external text files with tags or similarly readable inline
conventions. A custom editor may later be built on top of that text format. The
format must nest effects predictably and keep presentation markup out of the
final visible character count.

The initial external format uses one `.dialogue` file per conversation, ordered
`@page` directives, `@choice` directives, and inline portrait events such as
`[portrait=laugh_a]`. Parsing produces presentation-neutral conversation, page,
choice, and event objects. Inline events are indexed against visible Unicode
characters after tags are removed, never against raw source offsets. Authored
portrait and target IDs remain separate from asset paths and runtime callbacks.
Unknown directives, attributes, tags, and malformed fields are validation errors
with source locations. The exact grammar is documented separately in
`docs/dialogue_authoring_format.md` and may be extended for later effect types.

All layout-affecting text presentation, including font size, should be resolved
before reveal begins. Once a character is visible its size will not change, and
large text should participate normally in wrapping and paragraph flow.

The first implemented presentation spans are nestable `[color=<semantic-ID>]`
and `[caps]` tags. Dialogue refers to semantic color names rather than literal
RGB values; the active DialogueSkin maps those names to colors. Capitalization
is precomputed into final visible text, while colors remain indexed spans. Both
preserve the same visible-character coordinates used by reveal timing, portrait
events, and character voice requests.

Text should reveal progressively with a small per-character voice sound. While
a page is revealing, UI confirm should reveal the remainder immediately and
play every remaining character sound simultaneously; a subsequent confirm
advances the completed page. The resulting volume naturally communicates how
much text was skipped. This deliberately janky behavior should be implemented
literally first and reconsidered only after listening tests show a problem.

Each speaker should support a distinct voice sound or pitch range. Final voice
assets will be supplied later, so early prototypes may use placeholders while
preserving speaker-specific configuration.

Speaker presentation is resolved through data-driven profiles keyed by authored
speaker IDs. Profiles map stable portrait IDs to textures and carry optional
voice clips, pitch ranges, volume, and deterministic variation seeds. Missing
voice assets remain a valid, diagnosable state, and explicitly silent speakers
must not emit voice requests. Whitespace is silent by default; letters, numbers,
and punctuation are eligible for a character voice sound.

Players should have a universal dialogue-speed control expressed as a percentage
multiplier. Authored timing may override the local pace for spans as small as a
single word, including deliberately slow or fast delivery. The player setting
should scale all authored reveal timings rather than erase their relative
differences. Instant text should remain available as an accessibility setting,
with authored pauses and reveal-triggered events given an explicit policy.

Reveal behavior is deterministic and operates on visible Unicode-character
indices. An event at index N fires immediately before character N appears.
Punctuation adds delay before the following character. Confirm during reveal
completes the current page and executes all remaining indexed events in order;
confirm on a completed page advances. Authored `[speed=<multiplier>]` spans may
nest multiplicatively, and the universal player-speed multiplier scales their
resolved timing without removing relative slow or fast emphasis.

Begin with one shared visual skin in both overworld and battle. If the contexts
later need more identity, use compatible DialogueSkin resources rather than
forking the dialogue system. A battle variant may add heavier side ornaments,
King aura colors, or portrait plaques while retaining the same visual language.

DialogueSkin should expose independently replaceable StyleBox resources for the
text panel, portrait panel, and name plaque. Asset-backed StyleBoxTextures can
therefore replace provisional StyleBoxFlat frames without changing view
structure. The text interior, empty portrait, continue indicator, and fonts
should likewise be replaceable skin assets, while spacing and proportions remain
logical integer values.

Useful placement modes may eventually include:

* BOTTOM for ordinary overworld conversation. This is the approved default.
* TOP when a lower panel would hide important action.
* BATTLE_NEAR and BATTLE_FAR for dialogue associated with either side of the
  chess table.
* CENTER for announcements or supernatural speech.

These modes are prospective and should be added only as actual dialogue staging
requires them.


Pixel Scale and Window Behavior
-------------------------------

Dialogue should have its own UI pixel grid. It should not strictly inherit the
overworld's world-pixel scale, because the overworld uses an integer-scaled
square viewport while battles may use fluid native presentation. Binding the UI
to either world would make its apparent scale inconsistent across contexts.

The current prototype reparents the overworld DialogueLayer into the outer
viewport and sizes its labels using the overworld integer scale. This is useful
for the prototype but should not become the permanent dialogue architecture.

A recommended starting reference is a 320x180 logical UI grid. Choose one
integer UI scale from window height, then derive the available logical dimensions
from the actual window size:

    ui_scale = max(1, floor(window_height / 180.0))
    logical_size = floor(window_size / ui_scale)

The complete dialogue root should use that uniform integer scale and nearest
texture filtering. Dialogue layout should operate in logical integer coordinates.
The UI should not be forced into a fixed 16:9 subviewport; its logical safe area
should expand to reflect the real window aspect ratio.

Responsive layout rules should include:

* Anchor the panel to a logical safe area rather than directly to world content.
* Give ordinary dialogue a maximum logical width and center it on wide screens.
* Reduce panel width on narrow screens while preserving integer border pixels.
* Keep border positions, padding, font sizes, and ornaments on integer logical
  coordinates.
* Absorb leftover physical pixels in outer margins rather than stretching UI
  pixels non-uniformly.
* Permit top/bottom or speaker-relative placement so mid-match dialogue does not
  unnecessarily obscure the chessboard.

Integer scale transitions cannot be eliminated while preserving crisp pixels.
They should occur at deliberate UI breakpoints independent of overworld and
battle scaling. A future accessibility option may increase the chosen UI scale
without changing either game world's scale.


Typography
----------

Use a bitmap font designed for the dialogue UI grid rather than scaling an
overworld label opportunistically. Initial targets for a 320x180 logical grid:

* Body glyphs approximately 8-10 logical pixels tall.
* Two or three lines of dialogue per page.
* At least 5-7 logical pixels of padding inside the inner border.
* Speaker names distinguished through color or a small physical nameplate rather
  than a radically different type treatment.

Font evaluation must include punctuation, apostrophes, numbers, mixed case,
long proper names, and multiline wrapping. Choice lists must be tested early,
not added after the ordinary text box has been finalized.


Recommended Prototyping Sequence
--------------------------------

1. Build a dedicated Dialogue Lab scene with controls for panel dimensions,
   integer UI scale, text length, line count, portrait presence, choices, skin,
   and placement.
2. Create a plain grayscale nine-slice frame in Pixelorama.
3. Test the frame and bitmap font at 960x540, 1280x720, 1366x768, 1920x1080,
   ultrawide, and narrow-window proportions.
4. Exercise long dialogue, punctuation, speaker names, pagination, and choice
   lists before adding ornamental detail.
5. Finish the stone texture, palette, corner motifs, and continue indicator only
   after layout behavior is stable.
6. Move dialogue presentation ownership out of the overworld scene and into a
   persistent top-level presenter that can also host battle dialogue.


Open Design Questions
---------------------

The following decisions remain intentionally unresolved:

* The final source dimensions and border thickness of the nine-slice art.
* The exact bitmap font and body glyph height.
* Whether overworld and battle ultimately use identical skins or closely related
  variants.
* Whether portraits are standard, contextual, or reserved for important scenes.
* The precise panel height and number of dialogue lines per page.
* How aggressively battle dialogue should reposition itself around chess action.
* Whether UI-scale accessibility options ship in the first dialogue-system pass.

These should be answered through the Dialogue Lab and representative content,
not by committing prematurely to a single finished box illustration.
